docs/index.rst, before:

The bit level data interchange format
=====================================

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/license-BSD3-brightgreen
.. image:: https://github.com/hit9/bitproto/workflows/bitproto%20ci/badge.svg
      :target: https://github.com/hit9/bitproto/actions?query=workflow%3A%22bitproto+ci%22
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/Say%20Thanks-!-1EAEDB.svg
      :target: https://saythanks.io/to/hit9@icloud.com

Introduction
------------

Bitproto is a lightweight, easy-to-use and production-proven bit level data
interchange data format for serializing data structures.

The protocol describing syntax looks like the great
`protocol buffers <https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers>`_ ,
but in bit level:

.. sourcecode:: bitproto

   message Data {
       uint3 the = 1
       uint3 bit = 2
       uint5 level = 3
       uint4 data = 4
       uint11 interchange = 6
       uint6 format = 7
   }  // 32 bits => 4B


The ``Data`` above is called a message, it consists of 7 fields and will occupy a total
of 4 bytes after encoding.

This image shows the layout of data fields in the encoded bytes buffer:

.. image:: _static/images/data-encoding-sample.png
    :align: center


Features
---------

- Supports bit level data serialization.
- Supports protocol :ref:`extensiblity <language-guide-extensibility>`, for backward-compatibility.
- Very easy to :ref:`start <quickstart>`:
   - :ref:`Protocol syntax <language-guide>` is similar to the well-known protobuf.
   - Generating code with very simple serialization api.
- Supports the following languages:
   - :ref:`C (ANSI C)<quickstart-c-guide>` - No dynamic memory allocation.
   - :ref:`Go <quickstart-go-guide>` - No reflection or type assertions.
   - :ref:`Python <quickstart-python-guide>` - No magic :)

Code Example
------------

Code example to encode bitproto message in C:

.. sourcecode:: c

    struct Data data = {};
    unsigned char s[BYTES_LENGTH_DATA] = {0};
    EncodeData(&data, s);

And the decoding example:

.. sourcecode:: c

    struct Data data = {};
    DecodeData(&data, s);

Simple and green, isn't it?

Code patterns of bitproto encoding are exactly similar in C, Go and Python.
Please checkout :ref:`the quickstart document <quickstart>` for further guide.

Why bitproto ?
--------------

There is protobuf, why bitproto?

Origin
''''''

The bitproto was originally made when I'm working with embedded programs on
micro-controllers. Where usually exists many programming constraints:

- tight communication size.
- limited compiled code size.
- better no dynamic memory allocation.

Protobuf does not live on embedded field natively,
it doesn't target ANSI C out of box.

Scenario
'''''''''

It's recommended to use bitproto over protobuf when:

* Working on or with microcontrollers.
* Wants bit-level message fields.
* Wants to know clearly how many bytes the encoded data will occupy.

For scenarios other than the above, I recommend to use protobuf over bitproto.

Vs Protobuf
'''''''''''

The differences between bitproto and protobuf are:

* bitproto supports bit level data serialization, like the
  `bit fields in C <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit_field>`_.

* bitproto doesn't use any dynamic memory allocations. Few of
  `protobuf C implementations <https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/docs/third_party.md>`_
  support this except `nanopb <https://jpa.kapsi.fi/nanopb>`_.

* bitproto doesn't support varying sized data, all types are fixed sized.

  bitproto won't encode typing or size reflection information into the buffer.
  It only encodes the data itself, without any additional data, the encoded data
  is arranged like it's arranged in the memory, with fixed size, without paddings,
  think setting `aligned attribute to 1 <https://stackoverflow.com/a/11772340>`_
  on structs in C.

* Protobuf works good on
  `backward compatibility <https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview#backwards_compatibility>`_.
  For bitproto, this is the main shortcome of bitproto serialization until
  :ref:`v0.4.0 <version-0.4.0>`, since this version, it supports message's
  :ref:`extensiblity <language-guide-extensibility>` by adding two bytes indicating
  the message size at head of the message's encoded buffer.  This breaks the
  traditional data layout design by encoding some minimal reflection
  size information in, so this is designed as an optional feature.

Shortcomes
''''''''''

Known shortcomes of bitproto:

* bitproto doesn't support varying sized types. For example, a ``unit37`` always occupies
  37 bits even you assign it a small value like ``1``.

  Which means there will be lots of zero bytes if the meaningful data occupies little on
  this type.  For instance, there will be ``n-1`` bytes left zero if only one byte of a
  type with ``n`` bytes size is used.

  Generally, we actually don't care much about this, since there are not so many bytes
  in communication with embedded devices. The protocol itself is meant to be designed
  tight and compact. Consider to wrap a compression mechanism like `zlib <https://zlib.net/>`_
  on the encoded buffer if you really care.


Content list
------------

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2

    quickstart
    c-guide
    go-guide
    python-guide
    compiler
    language
    changelog
    license

Commit message:

Add performance.rst and fix some typos

docs/index.rst, after:

The bit level data interchange format
=====================================

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/license-BSD3-brightgreen
.. image:: https://github.com/hit9/bitproto/workflows/bitproto%20ci/badge.svg
      :target: https://github.com/hit9/bitproto/actions?query=workflow%3A%22bitproto+ci%22
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/Say%20Thanks-!-1EAEDB.svg
      :target: https://saythanks.io/to/hit9@icloud.com

Introduction
------------

Bitproto is a fast, lightweight and easy-to-use bit level data
interchange data format for serializing data structures.

The protocol describing syntax looks like the great
`protocol buffers <https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers>`_ ,
but in bit level:

.. sourcecode:: bitproto

   message Data {
       uint3 the = 1
       uint3 bit = 2
       uint5 level = 3
       uint4 data = 4
       uint11 interchange = 6
       uint6 format = 7
   }  // 32 bits => 4B


The ``Data`` above is called a message, it consists of 7 fields and will occupy a total
of 4 bytes after encoding.

This image shows the layout of data fields in the encoded bytes buffer:

.. image:: _static/images/data-encoding-sample.png
    :align: center


Features
---------

- Supports bit level data serialization.
- Supports protocol :ref:`extensiblity <language-guide-extensibility>`, for backward-compatibility.
- Very easy to :ref:`start <quickstart>`:
   - :ref:`Protocol syntax <language-guide>` is similar to the well-known protobuf.
   - Generating code with very simple serialization api.
- Supports the following languages:
   - :ref:`C (ANSI C)<quickstart-c-guide>` - No dynamic memory allocation.
   - :ref:`Go <quickstart-go-guide>` - No reflection or type assertions.
   - :ref:`Python <quickstart-python-guide>` - No magic :)
- Blazing fast encoding/decoding (:ref:`benchmark <performance-benchmark>`).

Code Example
------------

Code example to encode bitproto message in C:

.. sourcecode:: c

    struct Data data = {};
    unsigned char s[BYTES_LENGTH_DATA] = {0};
    EncodeData(&data, s);

And the decoding example:

.. sourcecode:: c

    struct Data data = {};
    DecodeData(&data, s);

Simple and green, isn't it?

Code patterns of bitproto encoding are exactly similar in C, Go and Python.
Please checkout :ref:`the quickstart document <quickstart>` for further guide.

Why bitproto ?
--------------

There is protobuf, why bitproto?

Origin
''''''

The bitproto was originally made when I'm working with embedded programs on
micro-controllers. Where usually exists many programming constraints:

- tight communication size.
- limited compiled code size.
- better no dynamic memory allocation.

Protobuf does not live on embedded field natively,
it doesn't target ANSI C out of box.

Scenario
'''''''''

It's recommended to use bitproto over protobuf when:

* Working on or with microcontrollers.
* Wants bit-level message fields.
* Wants to know clearly how many bytes the encoded data will occupy.

For scenarios other than the above, I recommend to use protobuf over bitproto.

Vs Protobuf
'''''''''''

The differences between bitproto and protobuf are:

* bitproto supports bit level data serialization, like the
  `bit fields in C <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit_field>`_.

* bitproto doesn't use any dynamic memory allocations. Few of
  `protobuf C implementations <https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/docs/third_party.md>`_
  support this, except `nanopb <https://jpa.kapsi.fi/nanopb>`_.

* bitproto doesn't support varying sized data, all types are fixed sized.

  bitproto won't encode typing or size reflection information into the buffer.
  It only encodes the data itself, without any additional data, the encoded data
  is arranged like it's arranged in the memory, with fixed size, without paddings,
  think setting `aligned attribute to 1 <https://stackoverflow.com/a/11772340>`_
  on structs in C.

* Protobuf works good on
  `backward compatibility <https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview#backwards_compatibility>`_.
  For bitproto, this is the main shortcome of bitproto serialization until
  :ref:`v0.4.0 <version-0.4.0>`, since this version, it supports message's
  :ref:`extensiblity <language-guide-extensibility>` by adding two bytes indicating
  the message size at head of the message's encoded buffer.  This breaks the
  traditional data layout design by encoding some minimal reflection
  size information in, so this is designed as an optional feature.

Shortcomes
''''''''''

Known shortcomes of bitproto:

* bitproto doesn't support varying sized types. For example, a ``unit37`` always occupies
  37 bits even you assign it a small value like ``1``.

  Which means there will be lots of zero bytes if the meaningful data occupies little on
  this type.  For instance, there will be ``n-1`` bytes left zero if only one byte of a
  type with ``n`` bytes size is used.

  Generally, we actually don't care much about this, since there are not so many bytes
  in communication with embedded devices. The protocol itself is meant to be designed
  tight and compact. Consider to wrap a compression mechanism like `zlib <https://zlib.net/>`_
  on the encoded buffer if you really care.

* bitproto can't provide :ref:`best encoding performance <performance-optimization-mode>`
  with :ref:`extensibility <language-guide-extensibility>`.

  There's an :ref:`optimization mode <performance-optimization-mode>` designed in bitproto
  to generate plain encoding/decoding statements directly at code-generation time, since all
  types in bitproto are fixed-sized, how-to-encode can be determined earlier at code-generation
  time. This mode gives a huge performance improvement, but I still haven't found a way to
  make it work with bitproto's extensibility mechanism together.

Content list
------------

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2

    quickstart
    c-guide
    go-guide
    python-guide
    compiler
    language
    performance
    changelog
    license
